filetypes
=========

This section describes the different file format and name conventions used in Picasso.

Movie Files
-----------

Picasso accepts several types of raw movie files: TIFF-family stacks (“.tif”/“.tiff”/“.ome.tif”/BigTIFF/Zeiss “.lsm”), raw binary data (file extension “.raw”), the Nikon format “.nd2”, MetaMorph “.stk”, Imaris “.ims” (Windows only), and — with the optional ``czi``/``lif`` extras (Python ≥ 3.12) — Zeiss “.czi” and Leica “.lif”.

When loading raw binary files, the user will be prompted for movie metadata such as the number of frames, number of pixels, etc. Alternatively, this metadata can be supplied by an accompanying metadata file with the same filename as the raw binary file, but with the extension .yaml. See ``YAML Metadata Files`` for more details.

HDF5 Files
----------

HDF5 is a generic and efficient binary file format for storing data. In Picasso, HDF5 files are used for storing tabular data of localizations with the file extension ``.hdf5``. Furthermore, Picasso saves the statistical properties of groups of localizations in an HDF5 file.

Generally, several datasets can be stored within an HDF5 file. These datasets are accessible by specifying a path within the HDF5 file, similar to a path of an operating system. When saving localizations, Picasso stores tabular data under the path ``/locs``. When saving statistical properties of groups of localizations, Picasso saves the table under the path ``/groups``. Since v0.11, Picasso also embeds the metadata directly in the HDF5 file under the path ``/metadata`` (see "Metadata" below), so that the file is self-contained.

An HDF5 file can be opened with various software packages. In Picasso, we use ``pandas`` for this purpose. For example, to open localizations, ``pandas.read_hdf(PATH_TO_LOCALIZATIONS, key="locs")`` is used. The ``key`` argument can be adjusted for other datasets. The available keys can be verified using ``pandas.HDFStore(PATH_TO_FILE).keys()``.

**Note:** Picasso HDF5 files store their metadata both in the embedded ``/metadata`` dataset and (by default) in an accompanying YAML metadata file, which are read together using ``locs, info = picasso.io.load_locs``. **See sections "Localization HDF5 Files", "Metadata" and "YAML Metadata Files" below for more details on the minimum requirements to process HDF5 files in Picasso.**


Importing HDF5 files in MATLAB and Origin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In MATLAB, execute the command ``locs = h5read(filename, dataset)``. Replace dataset with ``/locs`` for localization files and with ``/groups`` for pick property files.

In Origin, select ``File > Import > HDF5`` or drag and drop the file into the main window.

Localization HDF5 Files
-----------------------

Picasso's localization HDF5 files carry their metadata in two places: embedded in the HDF5 file itself under the path ``/metadata``, and (by default) in a YAML metadata file with the same filename, but with the extension .yaml. See ``Metadata`` and ``YAML Metadata Files`` below for more details. ``locs, info = picasso.io.load_locs`` is used to read both the HDF5 file and the metadata. The localization table is stored as a dataset of the HDF5 file in the path ``/locs``. This table can be explored by opening the HDF5 file with ``Picasso: Filter``. The localization table can have an unlimited number of columns. Table 1 explains the main column names in Picasso.

.. csv-table:: Table 1: Name, description and data type for the main columns used in Picasso.
   :file: table01.csv
   :widths: 20, 20, 20
   :header-rows: 1

The minimum required columns are: ``x``, ``y``, ``frame``, ``lpx`` and ``lpy``. For 3D data, the column ``z`` is also required. Since v0.9.5, Picasso supports the ``lpz`` column but it is not necessary for rendering (although recommended for accurate rendering in 3D).

Molecular maps (cluster centers) HDF5 Files
-------------------------------------------

Molecular maps generated with RESI or by single-protein resolution imaging (i.e., generated by SMLM clusterer or G5M) can be opened in Picasso: Render just like localizations. The column names change slightly to reflect the different data type. Table 2 explains the main column names in molecular maps.

.. csv-table:: Table 2: Name, description and data type for the main columns used in molecular maps in Picasso.
   :file: table02.csv
   :widths: 20, 20, 20
   :header-rows: 1

HDF5 Pick Property Files
------------------------

When selecting ``File > Save pick properties`` in ``Picasso: Render``, the properties of picked regions are stored in an HDF5 file. Within the HDF5 file, the data table is stored in the path ``/groups``.
Each row in the “groups” table corresponds to one picked region. For each localization property (see Table 1), two columns are generated in the ``groups`` table: the mean and standard deviation of the respective column over the localizations in a pick region. For example, if the localization table contains a column ``len``, the “groups” table will contain a column ``len_mean`` and ``len_std``.

Furthermore, the following columns are included: 

- ``group``: the group identifier;
- ``n_events``: the number of binding events in the region;
- ``n_units``: the number of units from a qPAINT measurement;
- ``len_cdf`` and ``dark_cdf``: estimates of mean bright and dark times, respectively, obtained by fitting the distributions to the CDF of the exponential distribution. Units: frames;
- ``locs``: the number of localizations in the region;
- ``len_mean`` and ``dark_mean``: mean bright and dark times, respectively, obtained by averaging over all binding events, rather than fitting to the CDF. Units: frames;
- ``len_std`` and ``dark_std``: standard deviation of bright and dark times,respectively;

Metadata
--------

Metadata describes a localization (or identification) dataset: the size of the field of view, the number of frames, the pixel size, the processing history, etc. In Picasso, metadata is represented internally as a list of dictionaries (``info``) where each step of analysis appends a new dictionary to the list.

Since v0.11, Picasso embeds this metadata directly inside the HDF5 file as a JSON string in the dataset ``/metadata``. This makes the HDF5 file self-contained, so the metadata is preserved even if the file is moved or renamed without its accompanying YAML file.

For convenience and backward compatibility, the metadata is, by default, also written to a separate YAML file (see "YAML Metadata Files" below). Whether this YAML copy is written is controlled by the user setting ``Save metadata in .yaml`` in ``~/.picasso/settings.yaml`` (default: ``True``). Picasso settings are also available under Files > Picasso settings in any module. Set ``Save metadata in .yaml`` to ``False`` to save only the embedded ``/metadata`` dataset.

When loading metadata (``picasso.io.load_info``, used by ``load_locs``), Picasso looks for the metadata in the following order:

1. The accompanying ``.yaml`` file (preferred, as it is easy to inspect and hand-edit);
2. The embedded ``/metadata`` dataset in the HDF5 file;
3. Otherwise, a ``NoMetadataFileError`` is raised.

YAML Metadata Files
-------------------

YAML files are document-oriented text files that can be opened and changed with any text editor. In Picasso, YAML files are used to store metadata of movie or localization files.
By default, each localization HDF5 file is accompanied by a YAML file of the same filename, except for the extension, which is ``.yaml``. Since v0.11 the metadata is also embedded in the HDF5 file itself (see "Metadata" above), so deleting the YAML file no longer breaks loading as long as the HDF5 file contains the embedded ``/metadata`` dataset. For older Picasso files (or movie files such as ``.raw``) that have no embedded metadata, deleting the YAML metadata file will result in an error.

The metadata file must contain the keys: ``Width``, ``Height`` (size of the field of view in camera pixels), ``Frames`` (number of frames in the movie), and ``Pixelsize`` (effective camera pixel size after magnification in nm). Example files can be found `here <https://github.com/jungmannlab/picasso/tree/master/samples/data>`_

Raw binary files (i.e., with extension ``.raw``) may be accompanied by a YAML metadata file to store data about the movie dimensions, etc. While the metadata file, in this case, is not required, it reduces the effort of typing in this metadata each time the movie is loaded with ``Picasso: Localize``. To generate such a YAML metadata file, load the raw movie into ``Picasso: Localize``, then enter all required information in the appearing dialog. Check the checkbox ``Save info to yaml file`` and click ok. The movie will be loaded and the metadata saved in a YAML file. This file will be detected the next time this raw movie is loaded, and the metadata does not need to be entered again.